He'd had a discussion with me. We're
sleeping in the street dead scared. Like
be careful with who you're listening to.
Have they really contributed to success?
Have they really built success? Or have
they simply been in a company that was
successful? Afterwards, I've heard from
journalists that like a ton of emails
were coming from banks cuz they simply,
you know, they're threatened by our
existence. And so the kind of articles
and and the writing about us shifted
from they're here to screw customers
over to do bad things. And that was
tough. I went home, I had dinner with my
wife [music] and we talked about it and
then I was like, "No, this time around I
should probably help him." Uh, I decided
and I tried to call [music] him and he
didn't answer and I emailed didn't
answer and morning my mother called and
said he was dead. [music]
Sebastian Sheami Kovski. He's the CEO
and founder of Europe's most highly
valued fintech privately held company.
His company is worth $45 billion.
Sebastian isn't a guy that comes from a
stable household or a silver spoon. It's
very much the opposite. The stories
you're going to hear about his home
life, his family, his father might just
bring you to tears because that's the
effect they had on me. He came from
incredibly, incredibly humble
beginnings. And he's built a company in
an industry where he was not qualified,
where he didn't have technical
expertise, where he couldn't code. That
has completely revolutionized an
industry. He is humble, he is honest,
and he's willing to tell you the truth.
And that's why it's such a pleasure to
sit here with him today and uncover what
it takes and who it took to build such a
revolutionary pioneering business. So
without further ado, I'm Steven Bartlett
and this is the diary of a CEO. I hope
nobody's listening, but if you are, then
please keep this to yourself. [music]
Sebastian. Um, one of the things that
I've come to learn from speaking to a
wide array of guests on this podcast,
from sports athletes to, you know,
really successful CEOs, is is how often
our our childhood and our early years
shape our adult foundations. And
whenever I meet someone like you that's
achieved um really remarkable things in
any, you know, in whatever discipline
they're in,
my first question always becomes um what
was it that made them remarkably unique
in their early years? what what was the
experience the cauldron that shaped them
into who they are today? Right. It's
kind of funny you asked that because
like I don't necessarily feel that I was
remarkably unique in [laughter] my early
days. I um a friend of mine uh their son
turned out to be blind. Uh but he has
perfect perfect pitch and he's now 8
years old and he's sitting and playing
the piano and singing and um that is to
me remarkable like and I I was thinking
about that like that was me when I was a
kid. Uh look, I I mean my parents were
from Poland. Uh they moved to Sweden uh
about a year before I was born. Um I was
born in the northern part of Sweden. Um
they were you know basically immigrants
because they didn't see a future in the
communist Poland.
Uh at you know which was the case at
that point of time
and so um so you know they came to
Sweden but obviously as as it was back
then it was very hard to integrate into
Swedish society. you know, English
wasn't as profound as it is today and
and there was, you know, a lot of
language barriers at that point of time.
There was also like a lot of, I would
say, skepticism about people with Polish
name and Polish backgrounds. Was hard to
get a job if you had a foreign sounding
name. There was a lot of these biases.
So, my parents struggled quite a lot to
integrate. My my mother was an early
retiree.
uh and my father kind of jumped from job
to job, was unemployed for quite a long
period of time, drove a cab for multi-
years, did a lot of different things,
right? And so I think that like I do
think that there's something to the fact
that as an immigrant kid with parents
that still like intellectually had
academical backgrounds and, you know,
had studied at universities and stuff
like that and never basically were able
to live up fully to their potential. I
do think that that kind of creates some
kind of like you feel like that's unfair
and you're going to like try to fix that
somehow. And
I was growing up among Swedish friends
who just had better economical
standards than we had and I was
obviously longing for what they had. Um,
you know, I remember that in with my mom
like there were weeks when, you know, we
were eating pancakes every day and I
thought that was great, but now I
realize it was because there was nothing
left.
That was the only thing we had like
flour and and milk and so forth. So like
[snorts]
so I think that like uh I I do think
that that kind of setting and there's
obviously some research that suggests
that in Silicon Valley more than 50% of
the companies are you know started by
immigrant backgrounds. I do think that
that kind of setting of you know having
a lot of the intellectual capacity and
and all these things and then the kind
of prerequisites potentially to do
something different and at the same
point of time this kind of drive of like
you kind of almost feel like it's unfair
life isn't necessarily fair but like you
feel like this is not fair we should
have like been able to have something
different than this and and maybe also
to some degree you I don't know to what
degree that's on an emotional level I
don't think on a rational level but an
emotional level also like your parents
really sacrificed their lives like I
Because it's hard for people that are
not have are not immigrants to
understand the consequences of not
having the friends from school, not
having the you know the understanding of
how society works, which school is
better, which is worse, how do you
interact with government, you know, how
does the system works, all these things
like that that total lack of
understanding of a specific society that
it means to shift like my parents did in
their, you know, uh late 20s, early 30s.
uh and how difficult that means for your
own ability to kind of you know do
something with your life. I think that's
something that's underestimated. So you
have the kind of emotional thing that
you want to you know you feel that they
did a massive sacrifice in some due
regards for for your behalf, right?
Yeah. And that feels like a tremendous
privilege. I
Yeah.
I wanted to ask you um cuz I I can
relate a lot to that. I'm an immigrant
myself. Came born in, you know, Africa
in Botswana and my parents came over
here. My mom can't read or write.
Fantastic country by the way.
Yeah. Yeah. Beautiful place. Um, but I
moved to the southwest of the UK where I
was in an all-white school of 1,500
white kids and it was was me and I and
we were also like
the poorest people in a middle class
area.
So you have I felt different all the
time.
Yeah.
And um did you feel that way?
Absolutely. Very much so. I mean, um,
even the fact that we were Catholics.
Now, I'm not a very religious person
today necessarily, but we were Catholics
and my, you know, my parents, we went to
to, uh, to church every Sunday and stuff
like that. In a very non-religious
society like Sweden, that was in itself
very odd. Uh, and I remember people like
saying, you know, Jesus wasn't, you
know, the son of God and stuff like
that, which at that point of time, now
today, I wouldn't necessarily, but
coming to that, at that point of time,
it was like, you know, somebody was
like, you know, saying things like that.
And then also the Poli like the view of
Poland at Proan was that there was this
country behind the Iron Curtain that was
spewing out you know uh toxic waste into
the Baltic. And so there was a lot of
like you know Polish and jokes about
Polish people and stuff like that. So I
mean all of this like I took heart. I
wouldn't say I was bullied. That would
be in my opinion taken too far because
people I know people have been bullied
for real and I I don't think I was. But
there was like that you know the sense
of being different of not necessarily um
you know both not having the same
prerequisites but also getting some like
quite a lot like sometimes getting quite
hard time over these things. Right.
And when you were a kid because because
I know I did I developed a very naive
thesis as to how I would escape this
scenario.
What was that?
Money
and success because it was the pain in
my household the lack of. So I thought
well that will fix it. Did you develop
your own thesis of how to
No. I think yes. very similar to yours,
right? Because also what happened in my
my in my life was that my parents
divorced when I was about 8 years old,
right? Um and so and they had a lot of
conflicts, right, on different topics
and and I think to your point like as a
child an interpretation of the reason
for that conflicts was the lack of money
like because that was what they were
talking about all the time. You were
hearing that. Now, I do today probably
have a slightly different view of
whether that was the only explanation
for their inability to, you know, to be
a couple and and and be together. But,
but at that point of time, I agree with
you. That was like one of my
interpretations was like, yes, it would
be nice to um to have, you know,
monetary success in life and that would
solve some of these problems. For sure.
For sure. I do agree with that. But but
I also in at least in in my life there
was in addition to that something else
which I cannot really explain which was
that I was always I was always intrigued
and like thought it was interesting to
kind of do business like I it's very
nerdy and I I can't explain it like I
remember reading like Richard Branson's
book when I was like 13 years old like
and I think it was like super
interesting or the founder of IKEA Ingva
Camprad who was a big big thing in
Sweden obviously because it's a Swedish
guy. So like I remember reading up on
these stories and I also remember like
trying to start businesses very early.
So I had like I did a lot of different
things in like trying to start it was
everything from like gathering some of
my friends and we would go to the
apartments where we were living the kind
of the the story buildings. There was
this bus stop where all the people were
coming and we would go there and like
offer us to carry you know groceries and
stuff like that return from like all
that kind of stuff like just finding
different ways of like you know trying
to do things. So is there there's
something really intriguing about that
in my mind because um as as
[clears throat] you've highlighted
immigrants tend to be more
entrepreneurial generally um and in the
situation you brought up in and I
reflect on my own situation because of
the circumstance I had made this
connection that if I was to have
anything or become anything it would be
a direct consequence of my own actions
and then I think maybe entrepreneurship
appealed to me because it was I knew I
wasn't going to do great in the
conventional route but then this bit it
was this really nice route to
potentially huge success.
Um [clears throat] um and it was all
kind of centered on what I did.
It was going to be me. M and I think you
know from hearing about the scenario you
were in with your parents and your
upbringing and being an immigrant
entrepreneurship uh was something that
maybe you could control if
No, but I think you I think you're right
in the sense that like I think
definitely in that environment growing
up in that setting you know that like
there's nobody who's going to help you
like there's nothing you're not going to
get anything from anyone right it's just
going to be either you do it or it
doesn't happen those are the two options
like it doesn't happen or you do it
yourself like those are the options
I think if I look at my own kids there's
a lot of things that happens in their
lives that fit into a third category, it
happens because dad and mom helped out
and you know whatever. There's a lot of
other things that happen. Uh but here it
was like you know if I want to have an
adventure, if I want to go and see the
other part of the city, I bike there. I
have to go there myself. Nobody's going
to drive me like you know this like and
I do think that there's some some lack
of like healthiness to that as well,
right? Whereas like it it it kind of
educates you and I haven't thought about
it but now as you're saying it actually
kind of thought about it that it does
help you. But I would also say on the
immigrant side what you said like they
are more commonly among um
entrepreneurs. But I also think that
like when I look at like you know when
we have problems in neighborhoods with a
lot of immigrants and so forth I think
that to me it's almost like I wish that
society would realize that like there's
going to be a lot of frustration a lot
of people with like you know energy.
They want something different. They want
something a change. They don't want
things to be the way they are. That's
kind of where you're coming from. And
then it's just society's ability to try
to showcase that that energy can be used
to become Slath and Ibrahimovic. It can
be used to become, you know, a music
artist. It can be used to become an
entrepreneur. It that energy or if we
fail to offer those opportunities or
showcase that those alternatives, they
may come out as burning cars and doing
other things that are less less, you
know, less productive, right? So I think
it's the really that you know to me
today I would just like wish that
society would really see it as like how
do we help showcase and show that there
are these great options for that like
buildup energy of wanting something to
be different right
and for that you need sort of great
empathy and to understand that people
are different shapes and sizes and that
kind of brings me nicely to the the
education system and your your personal
experience with the education system and
do you think it it did you served you
well or did it fail you? Well, I think
it did. One thing that to your point
which you were describing as well in
your own history is that I I one thing
that I do worry for today compared to me
was that I was in a school with mixed I
would still say 70 80% were Swedish 20%
at that point of time were had different
immigrant backgrounds. If they would
been only immigrants in that I would not
have anything to compare to. Right? So I
do think that the school system at that
point of time was less segregated than
it is currently at least in Sweden. I'm
not that familiar with the UK current
situation but I think that was that was
a case so in that case now were the
teachers that amazing and like you know
like you know there was a mix like some
were good some were bad right um so and
I remember like you know I I was one of
the kids who had very easy at school I
learned to read quickly and and so forth
right and I believe to some degree then
I became slightly bored because at the
Swedish school system at that point of
time was very much set up as like
everyone equals So if you were like
ahead in math or in head in reading or
whatever I I I literally still remember
from like you know second grade which is
8 years old in Sweden when you're 8
years old you know um we were having
like reading which meant that everyone
was reading from a book and like some
kids unfortunately for them like they
were still struggling really right and I
had already read the whole book so I was
quite bored sitting there listening to
the story that I had already read and
then I started disturbing the lesson
because that was kind of so I became I
became person that was quite problematic
for the teacher because I was just like
I was so underststimulated and that I
think is a little bit sad that I hope
that like schooling has become better in
like you know actually you know
understanding that all pupils are
different and need different support and
you know can get a different challenge
because you all need to have like a
continuous challenge right
and those that lesson there you learned
about that need for challenge
you're now the headmaster of a
great
school that has thousands and thousands
of employees in it.
Yeah. And that that point about making
sure that the people that attend your
institution are also challenged must
must uh still sort of be important to
you, right?
Absolutely. I think it's like actually
you know and in a way especially in
Swedish society which I you know the
Swedish culture is very much just saying
that alasad which means that everyone
should join like everyone should be part
of this and and that's a fantastic
ambition and vision for a society that
like no no man left behind is kind of a
different translation of it or or no
women left behind. Um but and and for a
while that was that was creating a
conflict because
Clana as a company we have very high
aspirations. We want to do something
very different. We want to you know
really as I say sometimes play in
Champions League and then you know the
problem is that's not true for everyone
in the work world. some people are fine
with playing kids league and and and so
forth, right? So, so it took us some
time to dare to say that CLA is not for
everyone, that Cla is actually a company
that wants to attract um people that
want to make a real impact, make a real
difference, that want to learn, that
want to be challenged. And that took
some time, and it might sound odd, but
for us, at least in in the Swedish
culture context, it took some time to
get to that where we started saying, you
know what, Cla isn't for everyone. Not
everyone is going to enjoy this
environment because not everyone is will
like a lot of people would say it's
amazing to climb Mount Everest. Did you
climb Mount Everest? They're fantastic.
That's one thing but it's a very
different thing that like how many
people are really willing to like freeze
their fingers off train for four years
like all the things that you need to do
to climb that mountain then like the
number of people that like check the box
and say I want to do that becomes
massively smaller right and so I think
the same applies for companies like a
lot of people would say I want to I want
to work for a successful growth company
doing things that's really cool
like climbing my nervous but then the
question is like are you willing to do
all these things like that that that
that means that you need to do in order
to be able to accomplish that, right?
And and um so so yeah, to your point
like I think the challenge today I
always tell that people like when they
you know when I interview them or just
like just be like be aware like this is
you're going to be very challenged here.
This is not going to be a place where
like it's just going to go easy. You're
going to have you're going to be very
very challenged here. What's the perfect
balance of challenge between being too
challenged that they, you know, they end
up in burnt out or something or
underchallenged that they lose
motivation like you did as a kid?
It's super difficult, right? And I think
that's why it has to it has to be about
encouraging them uh and and and seeing
like each individual by individual where
they are, right? Think about a great
personal trainer, right? when you go to
the gym um you know how do they find the
balance of you know how how much to push
you and when to kind of hold off a
little bit let you you know breathe and
so forth right actually I you know it's
kind of interesting because um my kids
have this swim teacher her name is Petra
and and I I can sometimes just sit and
watch her in when she's training my kids
swimming because she has that perfect
balance I've never seen a teacher that
finds that perfect balance as well as
she does. So, she pushes my kids exactly
to the point where they're are like dead
scared, like almost like they're almost
there where they're like going to want
to they want to give up and get out of
the out of that, but they're doing it
and then they're proud of what they
accomplished and and that to me to your
point like that's almost like a piece of
magic that a teacher has. Like the best
teachers can spot that in their pupils
can spot that and really find that
perfect balance, right? But it's very
difficult and it's obviously difficult
in a company with 4,000 people like how
do you try to put mechanism in place to
ensure that you that you find that
balance right and that that that you
really uh allow people to get to that
perfect spot u where they develop
heavily but at the same point of time
doesn't move you know ahead and just
bang their heads to the wall and and
feel give up or you know
to your to your point then as well about
um it took you a long amount of time to
realize that you wanted to just say to
the world and to anyone that was
considering joining your company. We're
not for everyone.
Um the pandemic happened and what I saw
was um leaders were kind of forced in
this wave of virtue signaling to say
everyone can work from home forever. If
you didn't say that now you're a bit of
an [__] company
and as as I reflect on that and as it as
it went through I started to reject that
narrative because I think that the
culture of the company should be
determined by the mission. And um also
the other thing was I actually think
that companies as you said should have
really clear communication at all stages
about who we are, how we work and what
our culture is. And allowing it to be
kind of you decide
I actually think is it's it's for me
super weak as leadership. But I also
think it will have an adverse effect on
the ability for the company to to
achieve its mission but also the company
culture. People knowing like what's
expected of them. But now it seems to
have become really like ac politically
acceptable to just say our employees
will do whatever they want.
How do you feel about all of that?
It's a very complex topic [laughter]
but but I think look I think that the
look I give you an example right is that
um previously which you might found odd
clana was not really uh following kind
of agile work tactics. Um and then a few
years into um cloners development, we
realized that some aspects of agile like
daily standups, weekly retros, working
as small teams on specific topics, there
were some aspects of these that are very
productive and really hope help
productivity help achieve our goals and
so forth. Um so then what we did is we
said like okay now all teams within CLA
should do daily standups should do
weekly retros and I think currently when
we look at it uh our data about 50% of
teams are following this right so then
the question is like how do you then
approach that because you feel yourself
very convinced that for example the idea
of daily standups is helping to be
productive um but if you enforce that if
you simply go and say everyone has to do
this period like check the box the
problem is like you can do daily
stand-ups in very productive ways where
you're engaged the whole team is engaged
you're discussing what can we do how can
we move faster etc etc or you can do
daily standups only to check the boxes
like there are different ways and and
that applies to almost all such rules
and concepts within companies so I think
that like what I'm still I still I don't
feel that I entirely figured this out
but But there's a balance in an
organization around like when are we
prescriptive and mandate mandating
things and when are we suggesting and
highlighting because in the end the
reason I believe in daily styles so much
is because of my own experience of that
but there was also something that I see
up myself. There was a a willingness to
I I was interested in trying to find out
better ways to working. I learned about
this. I saw it in practice being done in
a good way and then I my conclusion was
that this was that. So if you think
about my learning process, my personal
learning process in that situation, it
was driven by my interest, my passion
and then I accomplished. That's a very
different thing to if my board suddenly
would have dialed me up one day and said
everyone has to do daily standups period
because it didn't it would not have
given me the opportunity to learn and
and and reflect on it. That's when I so
a lot when I think about learning within
an organization I think about like the
karate masters and the Japanese and kind
of like remember all this like karate
kid and everything like [clears throat]
how they learn in those environments. It
is like obviously at the beginning there
has to be an interest by the individual
self to try to learn but then the master
doesn't always tell you like exactly
what to do. They like they provoke you
to try to learn yourselves, right?
There's a excellent example from the
Toyota way on that topic where like some
of the like masters of Toyota way within
Toyota would like take a lot of their
senior managers and they would draw a
circle on the factory floor within a
Toyota factory and then the the managers
would have to stand there and observe uh
the manufacturing of the cars and then
by the end of the day you know the
totally silent teacher would come and
say okay so tell me what have you
observed and then the the senior
managers within the circle have been
standing there the whole day had to say
well we saw this we saw that and then
the he would look at them the senior you
know senior kind of shenzen like senior
he would be like no another day you know
so they have to do another day so like
and I like provoke them because I think
that's the you and and it's very
learning is such a difficult thing right
because you don't as much as we we we
think that learning is sitting in a room
and listening to somebody um that is you
know a very inefficient way of learning
we learn by doing uh by doing things
ourselves right uh that's really u
that's the truth and I think that co is
such a good example of that because we
had a lot of experiences that we've
never had before and they taught us a
lot about our life our priorities a lot
of people talk about that today because
we were forced to do things differently
not because we read about co and we read
about you know how things can be
different because suddenly we had to
experience it and when you experience
that's when you truly that can impact
your behaviors can change your ways so
the the kind of it's a very difficult
balance in these companies consistently
from a culture perspective like how do I
how do I encourage encourage and kind of
push people to go and find out like you
know try to experience that and learn
for it but but not trying to enforce it
too much and and that's a balance game
right you cannot be entirely without
rules to your point because like if you
join a soccer team like there are some
rules like you come in to exercise every
morning if you just don't come to
exercise when like okay look uh you know
maybe you have a different philosophy
about how you're going to become a great
soccer player but like I just don't
believe in your flu [laughter] like like
it's not going to work so like if you
want to go and believe that you never
have to exercise to become a great
soccer player Hey, you do that but you
can't do it on it. Like right. So there
is obviously some selection criteria
where you have to decide within our
ecosystem within our company these are
the rules that will apply and because we
just feel that they're so fundamental
and so important but once you be on that
level then it's more like how do I
intrigue you? How do I challenge you to
develop that insight for yourself
so that [clears throat] you really come
to embrace those ways of working and
really make them your own and really
expedite them. I think and I haven't
solved all of this to be very you know
honest I think we have lots to learn
still with cla but I think that that
just uh is a very interesting int sorry
it was a long answer
no it's amazing it's really really
thoughtprovoking and I was I was
thinking yeah I don't think a lot of
people would have given that answer but
I I feel it's the the right one for so
many reasons especially as it relates to
the process of learning I think the
things that I was most successful at in
all facets of my life were things that
started with with interest and the
things that I had an allergic reaction
to in terms of topics in school
were the things that there wasn't
fundamental curiosity. So I was kicked
out of school
but in if you look at business and
psychology
like I was I would have gone to more
lessons I was 30% attendance in these
other subject and that's and that's so
true. So it's um it it provides a
different way to I think
and I would say one more thing on your
specific like work from home thing which
is also another thing to take into
consideration is that what ends up
happening and this is not a problem when
you're 10 20 people in the startup but
when you start becoming 4,000 people
the what what ends up happening is you
have obviously um unfortunately that's
the only way to describe it layers of
management and then you have the people
actually doing it and that's just how
most organizations are are structured.
But what ends up happening is okay how
are we going to do with this work from
home? what are the rules that going to
be set and there is a tendency for
people to go and say management team the
top people have to tell us what the
rules are and if you write those rules
the problem is like look at clana we're
active in like 40 offices across you
know 20 countries
each one which will be in a different
phase of covid or not and stuff like
that right so try to write a rule that
is applicable for each team and then
you're going to have individuals maybe
some individuals have immune diseases
and are extremely worry about you know
moving into that environment are more
careful than others. Maybe you're going
to have like you know some people that
have religious concerns somehow tied to
this. You know you're going to have a
flora because you have so many people
you have so many different individuals
with different perspectives. So what you
then sometimes need to do in my opinion
is you need to say look you will decide
for yourselves and what then ends up
happening is the uh in my opinion what
happens is that the people actually
doing the work they usually find that
quite attractive that they can take that
decision. So the managers of those
people they may find it's more difficult
because to them it's nicer that the top
management team has written a policy and
they can say like this is the rules but
why why these rules because it was said
so right and so then they can hide
behind that right and if you don't allow
them to hide behind that they will
actually have to motivate why are we
going to do like this we've decided in
this team that we're going to work in
office so we're going to do this and
that forces them to do that which is
good for them they need to do that they
need to promote about that. But there's
always a risk when you write too strict
rules on the top is that they're being
used and then there's just management
said so and that is just so bad for the
culture and everything. You want to
provoke an environment where people feel
like
the rules are there they were well
intent they had a good purpose but they
also need to be challenged if if they on
a specific individual and a specific
situation do not apply. There needs to
be a mechanism where those rules comes
back and say let's what if we were in
this and in the end rules can never be
an excuse for not thinking for yourself,
right? That that never happens and they
always have to be there's going to be
exceptions in a large company. There has
to be exceptions because those are
healthy signs of the fact that people
are thinking for themselves and judging
by themselves and not just hiding behind
the rules. I always reflect on the um
that that made me reflect then on the
example of the someone told me certain
country I think it might be Germany
where pilots were having a huge amount
of crashes
and it was because the the culture was
you don't challenge the pilot. So even
when the co-pilot knew there was
I think it was South Korea.
Was it South Korea? Yeah. Yeah, I think
it was. Yeah. The planes were crashing
but because the co-pilot didn't feel he
could challenge
and I think that's sort of analogous to
what you were saying there.
I talk about hu a lot in this podcast
because of the transformative impact
it's had on my life. Um, but there is
such thing as the hule bug. And the
reason I started my hule journey and
became a huligan as they call it was
because of a guy called Mike in my
office back at social chain who would
evangelize about it all the time. And
then once I tried it one day and I saw
the impact it had on me, I became the
same type of evangelist. And even here
at the diary of a CEO studios, we have
now three people that are stood
currently in this room with me that have
caught the hu bug. Dominic Murray, Jack
Sylvester, and my assistant Sophie
Chapman. They're all now working out and
they're all addicted. I I think addicted
is a strong word. Um they're all heavily
reliant on hu to plug that gap in their
diet and their lifestyle that um a busy
lifestyle and uh convenience food
options sometimes create. So I want as
many people listening to this to try
Hule. And if you catch the Hule bug,
then I genuinely believe it will change
your life. I I have to go back and and
and hear about the start of of CLA
because you know one of the things that
really intrigued me and made me feel a
lot of respect towards you was that
you're not technical as a co-founder.
Unfortunately, no.
Built this mega tech company but you're
not technical and I know I tried when I
was 18 that was my first failure. Um but
I found that really just horrifying and
respectful.
Yeah.
So tell me so how did it start and um
and and where did you find the courage?
Sure. No. So, look, as I said
previously, like it's kind of ironic. I
always had tons of business ideas. And I
even remember like when I uh when I was
like probably 13 or something. Uh in
Sweden was the first time we had private
radios, private radio stations. And I
thought the one in my home city of GPS
sucked. So, I kind of wrote the business
plan for them how they should change the
shows and the internet and actually
called them and tried to convince them
to change.
13.
Yeah. 13. [laughter] Like I can imagine
they were like laughing their guts. Like
this 13 years old is calling us like you
should do this programming instead. you
should have a show about this. And
I bet they gutted now. I bet they have.
[laughter]
Exactly. So, for whatever reason, I
always had this like in inclination to
wanting to do something. And then um I
did two years at Stocken School of
Economics, which is one of the like top
schools uh in Sweden around if you're,
you know, want to study at an economical
direction. Everyone at that point, this
is 2000, everyone wanted to work at
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Mckenzie.
That was really the the vibe. It's
actually interesting because they had
this survey where they said like at that
point of time when they asked students
7% wanted to start their own company.
Today it's 70%. So it just gives you
like how much of a shift there's been
during that period of time. But anyways
and then in 2002 because I went directly
from college to university. I was like
okay I just got to do something else. I
mean every all my friends had like
backpacked and stuff like that. So um
ended up me and actually what became my
co-founder Nicholas. We went backpacking
which at that time because we always
wanted to do something that was a little
bit different. Uh we ended up going
around the world without flying. Uh
which was a lot of fun. So if you want
to go to YouTube, you'll find the videos
when we were like from the
YouTuber.
Yeah. Because we had this idea that we
were this was just at the beginning of
all these like you know big brother and
all these like you know do documentaries
and stuff. So so we thought we were
going to like we we recorded the whole
thing and we did we thought we were
going to like air this as a TV show.
That's very funny.
I need to ask you one question about
that. How did you get to Australia
without flying?
Um, yeah. So, you had to u we took a a
cargo ship from Singapore to Brisbane.
Ah, okay.
And then we had a cargo ship from Sydney
over New Zealand up to Mexico. So,
that's how we and then we actually took
the QE to Q Elizabeth second uh between
New York and um and Southampton. So, so
that was kind of how we did that that
those were the expensive parts of the
trip. I mean, we we did it on an
extremely low budget. I think on average
we spent like $10 a day. Like we spent,
you know, we're sleeping in the streets.
I actually slept on Piccadilla Circus on
the street uh when we were in London
that night and uh while we're passing
through London and then I went we went
to hide park when when the sun had risen
and and slept because you don't sleep
really well in Pika Circus at [laughter]
4:00 a.m. I tell you.
So like you can imagine how you know the
vibe there at that point of time. Um but
anyways so we came back and then I
missed to start my semester and so
instead I was like on the second
sbatical year that I hadn't expected and
it was 2003 and I was looking for a job
in my home city of Upsala and I couldn't
get a job. I was actually on welfare for
a time because I just couldn't get any
it was a low economy was very hard.
Eventually ended up working at this
account receivables factoring firm which
was like the last place in the world I
ever thought as a sales guy.
Yeah. and and I was like okay but now
I'm here I'm gonna do the most out of
this right so I started calling and
trying to sell these services and then I
it was very difficult to sell such
services to companies because they're
all like yeah you can save me £400 a
year but I don't really care because we
work with this other company for 15
years and they're great and whatever but
then I started talking to entrepreneurs
and these entrepreneurs were starting
small e-commerce companies because some
of them had figured out at that point of
time you could buy Google AdWords super
cheap because no one was buying them and
then you can get some traffic and you
can sell some stuff and like it was like
it was all kinds of stuff right so we
started talking Um, and they were really
keen like, "Oh, I can save £400 a month
a year. That's awesome. I'm going to
work with you guys." So then I started
like thinking about payment services and
I was asking them, "What are your
problems? What are the things that you
would like to be solved?" So that was
kind of where the idea came from. But
then a year had passed and I want to go
back to school. So I came back to the
stock school of economics to start my
third year. I left my job and um but
there was an incubator at the school and
it was very early at this point of time.
Now everyone has an incubator but time
it wasn't that common. So I went to the
CEO of the incubator and I said, "Hey,
you know, I have this idea. It's kind of
payments offering buy now pay later
services. It would look like this and
you know, whatever." And she was like,
"This is awesome. You have to do this."
And when she said so, I was a little bit
like now I can't just like give up on
this, you know. So, so I was kind of
looking around and then I stumbled into
one old friend of mine, Victor, uh, who
I knew a little bit and he was like
because I was sitting in the cafeteria
of the school and I was telling some
friends like, "I want to do this
company. I was going to do this." And
everyone was like, "Yeah, good luck to
you, man."
Kind of like patronizing. Is it
patronizing and like kind of like fake
support?
You do that and I'm going to go to
Morgan Stanley and make all my like
that's like that that was like kind of
the the the perception. So So that's
kind But Victor then was the only one
who was like, "Wow, that's awesome. I'm
with you if you do it, right?" So I was
like, "Okay, that's cool. Let's do it
together." We didn't know each other
that well. And I had Nicholas who was an
old friend of mine who I did the trip
around the world with. So So we kind of
joined forces. But then but it was still
like a huge decision to us like starting
a company at that point of time felt
like wow crazy. Are we giving up on
careers? What's going to happen? You
know, so it was only when we came to the
conclusion we're like, okay, you know
what? Let's not think about this as a
lifelong decision. Let's think about
this as a six-month decision. I often
tell this to people today. Like we said
like we're going to do this for 6
months, but if we do it for 6 months,
we're going to do like all of our
energy, all of our time is going to be
this for the next six months. So we even
had like a rule. We had to eat breakfast
in the office. We had to be there. We
were counting the hours who everyone
else was there. So it's fair. So we were
like we were living in the office for
the first 6 months and we were just like
focused on that and nothing else and and
but it was when we decided it was going
to be a 6 months and then we're going to
evaluate then we kind of was easier to
take a decision because you're like yeah
six months whatever that's fine right um
so so we got off uh and then what we did
we realized that we couldn't code to
your point right we couldn't code we
needed a system right so we're like how
are we going to solve that so are we
going to raise money try to pay some
engineers and hire them what are we
going to do and eventually we ended up
the the incubator we're in, they had
this um like Christmas drinks thing uh
where they invited some business angels
and they invited the companies that were
in the incubator to pitch. And so
Nicholas, my co-founder, did like a 30
secondond pitch. And after that, a woman
called Yane Valerude uh kind of
approached us and and and she was like,
you know, she almost like pushed me up
to a corner. She's like, "This is
awesome. Tell me what you're going to
do." She was like, she just heard that
pitch and she was like, "I like this
business idea." And she told us, "Look,
I have these engineers and they're like
the best engineers. They're amazing."
Cuz she had actually done one of the few
really successful exits during
era where they had sold a company for
150 million pounds. Um, and so she had
money from that and she had the
engineering team from that. So she said,
"I'm going to connect you with those
guys." And so we sat down with those
engineering guys and they were much more
senior than us than were like in their
40s and you know we were 20s and and
[snorts]
there unfortunately a misunderstanding
arose right where our understanding was
that these five engineers or four
engineers they really were they were
going to join us full-time and work on
this and continue developing the company
with us. Right? Their understanding was
they were going to give us some source
code some code and a system that works
and then they're off and doing something
else. And so, uh, but you know, as it
is, and I now try to tell other founders
this today, like if you found friends
and you want to start a company
together, don't only talk about all the
amazing stuff you're going to do and
everything you're going to accomplish.
Also sit down and ask like, how many
hours per week are you going to spend on
this versus because you love exercising
and you love, you know, hanging out with
your friends and so forth. Just so like
not that, you know, you can do it on 30
hours a week or you could do it on 80,
but just so you're aligned. There can't
be two big misalignments. It can be one
person doing 30, another one doing 80.
Make it super concrete exactly what
expectations you have on each other
because otherwise there's just such a
big risk of like misalignment and
conflict.
Resentment comes quickly, doesn't it?
Right. So then what we did so we we
brought those engineers on board and
they started coding and they were
excellent. They were amazing engineers.
So they started coding the system in
December. In in April, four months later
we launched with the first customer. So
it's four months and they put together a
lot of the fundamentals that actually
still you know today are part of what
clon offers as a service. So they were
super but then you know after that they
were like good luck guys see you later
and we were like no no no that's not
what we agreed and then we looked into
the contract and we had given off 37% of
the company to them for the technology.
Uh and then we had given 10% to Jane uh
as the business agent but she gave us
£60,000. Right. Mhm. [clears throat]
And so um and then so each one of us
then had equal so we had 17% each um and
so that was kind of the setup after that
and then we had basically given away now
all these percentages to these engineers
and they just left us and so that became
a quite tough conflict obviously but
legally speaking they had followed the
contract so there was nothing for us to
go into contracts and say you know
whatever because the contract was we
just we we just hadn't talked about this
and we were under different assumptions
of what they meant. the contract was
just there. Like we didn't think about,
you know, this consequence. So, they
ended up leaving us. And it was kind of
funny because in that room at one point
of time, uh, in the boardroom, one
person said, "Well, you know what? Just
so you know, Sebastian, you have to calm
down on this topic. Cla is never going
to be the size of a company where it's
going to need four great engineers like
this."
Christ, [laughter]
that's kind of funny. I almost laugh.
It's kind of funny now as I think back
about it. [snorts]
Did you ever resolve that?
Sorry. Did you ever buy buy them buy it
buy them out or
No. So what ended up happening is to
some degree I think just because they
didn't understand the potential of what
they had built together with us they
also sold much too early. So as a
consequence I mean they sold at a very
early day where maybe the company was
$10 million worth or something.
Oh god that's awful.
Yeah. So so I mean well it's not awful
in a sense because to me it feels a bit
fair because they got the upside of what
they did. If they would have
participated longer and so forth they
would have seen a very different upside
and they would have built the company
with us. But you know, but this was a
challenge for us as a consequence to
your point because at least what it
allowed us to do is very quickly get a
system live and get something going. But
then as they left, I needed to figure
out, okay, I need to hire engineers and
I have no clue how to code and how do I
evaluate a good engineer from a bad
engineer? I have no clue. You're like,
architecture, what is that? You know,
like [clears throat] there was like zero
knowledge, right? you and that is one of
the biggest challenge I think for a lot
of people like managing people that do
the same thing that you know yourself is
one thing. Trying to manage somebody
that does something that you have no
clue how to do is very very difficult.
How did you I was in the same place. I
was I knew needed to build a website not
technical went on Google just started
looking at their own website [laughter]
and using that as yeah this this is cool
this animation looks good I will hire
them to build you know. So how did you
solve that problem of not knowing what
good looks like? Well, first and
foremost, I think unfortunately um you
know in what ended up happening in our
situation was that um one of the guys
from this engineering team stayed on
because they were still shareholders for
a period of time, right? So he stayed on
as an adviser and we started hiring some
engineers and some of which were better,
some which were worse, some you know as
you will always have a mix and we also
got a CTO eventually who came in um and
the C he he as a CTO was an amazing
programming and developer but he wasn't
necessarily the CTO that would you know
hire the right talent build it he wasn't
businessoriented he was very much like
technically interested and wanted to
build like really beautiful code bases
and stuff like that which you know some
engineers tend to have more that
tendencies
and what was a frustration to me is that
for a long period of time and this was a
challenge in Sweden and stock at that
point of time the advisors that we had
around us
uh none of them had built a $45 billion
company like we are in today none of
them had that experience but they were
senior in our opinion compared to myself
they had done great corporate big jobs.
We had like, you know, advisers and
board members that had corporate
backgrounds and been in big institutions
and and so forth. And so they were
giving us a lot of advice on topics
like, is this the system that you're
building? Is this fast enough? Should
you be able to build it faster or slower
like the progress and things? And so
when they were giving us that advice, it
was bad advice. But we were too young
and too inexperienced to be able to
recognize that. And so unfortunately, it
took us some time and it created a lot
of frustration because I was always
sitting there. like does does it really
need to take this long time to build
something like and is it really unfair
of me to expect that the engineers are
like a little bit interested in the
product they're building as well and the
business side of it or are they only
always going to be interested in the
coding itself and the technical
challenge like uh shouldn't I be able to
engage with them on the product side as
well like and a lot of times we were
like they were like oh we want to build
this product you need to give us more
clear specifications and I was like but
if I write those specifications what's
left to do like That's part of the
creative process to sit together and
create these. So, you know, you get
stuck in a lot of these things and then
and then eventually I remember I was
very frustrated because at one day when
Seoia invested and that was why Sequoia
was so important to us because in 2009
we got Sequoa to invest in the company.
Michael Morris joined our board and one
of the ambitions we had with that was to
get get a some kind of contact point to
somebody that had actually seen large
tech companies grow had seen real
success of a tech company and start
understanding their mindset. And at that
point of time I unfortunately concluded
that like it was not going to work with
our CTO because he didn't have that
right mindset for it and [clears throat]
he was interested in something very
different. He's a great guy in many
ways, but he wasn't the person that
would be able to allow us to build our
engineering organization and and bring
us to become a true tech company and be
really technologydriven.
And and I remember going into the board
eventually and saying like and and at
that point of time uh the representative
of the engineers that build the original
system who was on my board, he had been
telling me all over and over again like
I was like I'm a little bit worried.
Should it really be this slow? And he
was like, yeah, you know, it's
different. It's this and that. And then
eventually I came to him one day and
said, look, now I've taken a decision.
unfortunately I have to change CTO and
he was like good decision and I was like
I almost wanted to smack him [laughter]
in the face I was like for four years
you were telling me that this is okay
and now you I'm doing this change and
you're saying good decision like that's
not like you shouldn't say you're wrong
that would be respecting him more right
so there was in that setting we were
coming up for there was a it really
nowadays I appreciate much more like how
I have to really look through a person
ask myself is this a believable person
is this somebody I should really take
advice from and I think a lot of
entrepreneurs ers that will listen to
this and startup people like be careful
with who you're listening to. Have they
really contributed to success? Have they
really built success or have they simply
been in a company that was successful?
Like those are very different different
aspects, right? So being very careful
about who you get advice from. So but
that's kind of how we solve it. So it
was just like we had to learn and test.
And then the last piece of very
practical advice that we did which was
one of the best things I ever did was
because I was so mixed up like
engineering whatever what does it mean?
And then I said to my CTO a very
practical thing. And I was like, "Hey,
can you show me how you fix a bug?" And
so we sat down together by his screen
and he basically took one bug that we
had and he started searching in the code
and then he wrote you know the fix and
then he wrote a test case for the fix
and just sitting and watching him do
that made a huge difference for my
understanding of like you know how long
to so I think as much as sometimes you
may feel like very whatever you're
managing that you don't understand you
may feel like oh my god so difficult and
they're talking about all these
technical terms and so forth sit down
next to
spend half a day, spend a day, just look
at when they're doing it, a designer or
whatever it is, something that you don't
know how to do yourself, just sit next
to them, see them do it, and that
already will at least put you at a
different level of understanding of, you
know, the job and so forth. So, there
are practical ways in which you can try
to gap that,
you know, bridge that gap.
So important because again, you comes
back to communication and I had the
exact same thing and [clears throat] uh
I think in my first tech business, I
wish I'd done exactly that. I wish I'd
taken the time to go and um build
empathy towards the the role of my my
CTO and um understand what his job was
and I guess how I could make it easier
but also to I really also should have
had a objective outsider come in and do
an assessment on how he was working, how
I was working and everything in between.
I think entrepreneurs don't do that.
They they
they they I think because they don't
know what they don't know.
Exactly.
You don't know that. So that's the
biggest curse in business. Not only
entrepreneurs, it's great managers and
leaders and people as well. I think to
your point, the really tricky thing is
to know what good looks like.
Yeah.
Right. What does good look like, right?
Oh god. Yeah.
That's different. Like you judge some
work like what would great look work
look like. And it's when you've
established that understanding whether
it's in communications, marketing, you
know, whatever. You know what good
[clears throat] looks like? Then your
job becomes so much easier. But but the
only way to find that out obviously to
your point is introducing external
people, talking to people, comparing,
you know. Uh we also did that actually
with my CTO at that point of time which
was one of the things we actually did
that led me to conclude that I had to
let him go was that I said because I was
having a lot of dialogue like should
this takes this long time and so forth.
So one thing I eventually said was you
know what we do we booked meetings with
five other CTOs in five large Swedish
companies. So among them were like
Ericson the more traditional ones but it
was also like a gambling company that
was doing fantastic. There was a gaming
company Dice. Oh yeah.
Um you know stuff like that. and we went
and had meetings with them and in those
meetings I started raising my concerns
and stuff like that and I was listening
to the the other company's CTO's
answering to the same discussions.
Oh wow.
Comparing it to the answer of my CTO and
in that conversation I really saw the
difference in how they [clears throat]
were attacking these problems and what
their philosophy is and the you know
and the level of optimism in which they
approach problems as well. for sure
because that's for me has been the
biggest differentiator between the
really exceptional CTOs I've worked with
in San Francisco when I was there versus
bad ones is they have a everything is
possible attitude right and those people
are an absolute joy to work with speed
and optimism in a in a CTO is just makes
your life
for sure and again I just want to
highlight here that like my CTO wasn't
bad he wasn't bad
he he was totally fine and okay but he
wasn't the right person
to build a $45 million company like that
was just like two different things,
right?
Many of those.
No. No. Exactly. Right. So, he wasn't
exceptional and he didn't have the right
mentality.
Yeah.
To to do what we're doing now.
Pain.
Yeah.
Part of the reason I started this
podcast was because and why it's called
the driver CEO is I wanted to show um I
wanted to really give a fair impression
of the other side of entrepreneurship.
It's been super glamorized. It's
probably why you know that stat you
shared where it went from seven to 70%.
That's probably why it's now seen as a
very sort of sort of glamorous thing.
And I wanted to create a bit of a a
platform to share some of the harder
parts of business. And listen, you've
built a company worth $45 billion. Like
I know that it was painful.
Mhm.
So talk to me about the the pain and the
unexpected pain that might have put you
off starting this had you known it. Had
you been had you not been naive enough
to to realize how painful it is at
times?
But I think that like my a lot of my
pain I would feel equals when I see
athletes,
you know, trying to throw or trying to
jump and then failing and the
frustration that you see in them when
they cannot achieve what they want to
accomplish. I feel that's a lot of the
pain that I've experienced. So like my a
lot of my frustration and pain has been
associated with like oh you know I know
we can do this. I know we have the
opportunity to do this and we're just
not getting there. We're not getting
there. It's not getting through. It's
not happening the way it could be. I
think that's a big piece of a pain for
me is that lack of like ah so
frustrating to feel like you're so close
something could be there but it's not
that. Um I think that that's one part.
And I mean
another part is obviously um you know
when things go wrong and you're
frustrated because you know you wanted
something to be better and it didn't
work out and and stuff like that. So
you're very like uh you're challenged by
those situations
in terms of stress.
Mhm.
How do you feel that and how have you
dealt with that?
Um
I am not that stressed to be honest. I
don't know why. It's almost like to some
degree I'm almost more stressed when
things are good. [laughter]
No, because like like when we have some
crisis or something happens, right? Like
you know, we had an incident with some
breach of data uh for example um few
months ago, right? In those situations,
as much as it's painful that something's
happened and I'm sad about potential
consequences for individuals that we
might have made some errors,
I feel like it all becomes like
execution mode. We bring everyone into
room. It's just like what do we do? What
do we do now? And I kind of in a way
enjoy that work. It's very concrete.
It's very like you know focused. And
you're like there's nothing else. You
have to do only this now. Let's see
about what can we do about this problem?
How are we going to fix it? Who's doing
what? You know, and so forth. In those
situations, I don't feel that stressed.
Actually, I can even feel an adrenaline
in that situation. As much as it's
painful to me to see the consequences, I
can feel an adrenaline and like, let's
get this to work. Let's do this now.
Let's, you know, let's take on this
challenge that has suddenly arised.
Um,
it's funny, the best leaders, and I'm
sure you'll find this even in your
company,
all seem to speak to that. They all seem
to be really emotionless in those the
the absolute chaos moments, right? And
it becomes, you know, a methodical
process of how to solve the problem.
Yeah.
Versus
and and I do think again as much as you
know I don't want to obviously I feel a
lot of pain from the perspective of like
if we've done a mistake or done
something wrong as a company it might
have had implications for our customers
or whatever that's very painful but at
the same point of time those incidents
or the situations when you gone through
something that was very chaotic or very
challenging are the moments that have
created the strongest relationships
within the companies have shown you know
has shown some amazing talent stepping
up to like it's a little bit like you go
on a vacation, it's just sunny, you
don't really remember it, but if you had
like a, you know, a thunderstorm, you
you'll talk about it for for for years,
right? So, like there's something to
that. Um, so I think my stress may
actually more come from sometimes when I
feel like we're all kind of happy. We
all feel it's going well. Like it cannot
be true. There must be something that's
wrong. And I think Alex sitting over
there will will um we'll kind of smile
now because I think you will recognize
this. But like um so I think that that's
where I actually more get stressed from
like are we doing fast enough? Is this
good enough? Like
that's really interesting. I it come
also relates to your point about bit
needing to be challenged. you talked
about in school when you'd read the book
and you got bored
and that it's funny because I I was
writing my book and I finished writing
my book recently and it was published
and one of the paragraphs in it talks
about how I used to believe that my life
was a um the pursuit of trying to get to
stability but in fact when you look at
when people arrive at a point of
stability everything is fine
when they've won the gold medal then
they descend into chaos
then they get depression and they get
they lose their sense of purpose and
then they they get irritable so I I
flipped it and thought you know my life
is actually the the the the pursuit of
of staying in chaos because chaos is my
stability and if I ever get to
stability, completed goals, nothing to
strive for, then I descend into chaos.
And it sounds exactly like what you've
described there.
Aspiring and working for things is so
motivating, important. I think to some
degree, as much as Clana had a lot of
success in Europe, there's a kind of
funny story around this topic because
um you know, we were doing really well
in Europe and developing our services,
but there wasn't necessarily that much
fierce competition from one perspective,
right? And then as we were moving into
the US market, there's this company in
Australia called Afterpay run by Nick.
Oh yeah.
And they're competing head-on with us,
right? And they were doing really well.
This is back in like 2018. And I was
like, ah, this is so annoying. Like
they're coming in here, they're taking
our market share, they're doing our
product, they're copying us, you know,
all this frustration building up. And
the funny thing is I happen at that
point of time to be visiting with Mammud
who runs Bhoo, right? Oh, good friend of
mine.
So yeah. So I'm sitting down with
Mimmude and I'm like complaining to him
and I'm like look Mimmude it's a little
bit like you know you know the Olympics
when there's this guy who's been like
this is his fourth Olympic and everyone
knows like now finally he's going to get
the gold matter because he's been
training like and then this young guy
comes from nowhere and like but that's
so unfair. This is my fourth Olympic and
this guy comes in and Mimmude looks at
me and he's just like Sebastian shut up.
[laughter] Stop whining. stop whining
and like this is going to make you so
much better. You have been not having
proper competition. You now have proper
competition and it is so true. CLA in
the last 3 years thanks to the
competition with Afterpay in the US has
become such a much better company. It
has helped us so much to improve to get
focused like and it was just so funny
when he was just like stop whining me
and I can't you know he will speak his
Manchester. I can't do that. I won't be
able to try to to replicate how you
express this but I thought it was really
funny. Well, that's my mood. I remember
the first time I met him. Um, I was in
his office four days that week and he
insulted me several times, but in the
most loving way, like you remember him
smashing his pen on the desk and telling
me how stupid I was because [laughter]
of a decision I was going to make. And
we've been I've been like good family
friends with with the whole family for
for a very very long time.
Just on that point then, what was the
toughest moment in your cler journey?
A moment you think that was that was the
worst [__] day.
Similar to there's been some media
scrutiny of us in the UK. We had a
similar experience in in Swedenbird a
few years earlier which was in around
2012 and 13 and and like it started off
with this like media inquiry about what
we were doing because we were you know
first just like oh it's an amazing
successful company and then where was
people like oh we're actually doing
credit and what does that mean and stuff
like that
and so there started to be quite a lot
of like and it actually started with a
mistake that we had done internally it
was an operational mistake we had done a
stupid thing um and and that had
resulted into a lot of customer
complaints and stuff which was our own
fault. But that was the beginning of it.
And and I think through that process
when the paper started writing about us
in a negative way, um I kind of jumped
in and it's kind of funny because I was
actually at that point of time they had
comments fields on the articles. So I
would go into the comments field and
write my responses in real time and then
other consumers and readers would answer
and I would answer them and even the
newspapers started writing about like
look Sebastian CEO is on our forum
discussing the topics. So I was very
engaged. She was sitting like working
24-hour and I was thinking about like
how do we give because quickly the media
went you know out of control and there
was a lot of bias and and you know
inaccurate reporting and not just like a
lot of things some were accurate and
some was fair but a lot of it was also
like out there and then obviously the
banks because we are a big threat to the
establishment banks so even you know
afterwards I've heard from journalists
that like a ton of emails were coming
from banks saying like oh you know
they're bad they're this and or whatever
cuz they simply, you know, they're
threatened by our existence. And so, um,
so there was that going on. But I
remember what was the hardest thing to
me to point is that that situation
itself was fine, but at some point of
time the um uh the kind of articles and
and the writing about us shifted from
they're bad, they've done these mistakes
to they have bad intent. They're here to
screw customers over, to do bad things,
right? And that was tough. That was
really tough because I know that wasn't
true and I know that we have good
intentions and we're trying to do that.
We have done mistakes and we can fix
things. But being judged and questioned
on your intentions of what you Yes, that
hurt a lot and I took that very hard and
I took that to heart. Um, so that was
very very challenging to cope with.
When those things happen, what kind of
partner do you become to your your
romantic partner? your wife. You got a
wife.
Yeah.
She knows that I'm like extremely
passionate about Clana and the company
and and I think that she's um she knows
that like a lot of my thought process
will be here all the time. Right. So I
think that but but you know I'm very
lucky in the sense that Nina is an
amazing uh person herself. She's done
amazing things and now she's running a
startup with 30 people. Um so that helps
because she has her own like things and
and and actually we can come together at
dinner table and we can you know um we
can talk about the challenges and the
things that we um um that we face
and we can exchange thoughts about that.
So it it we have three kids as well
right I have a four-year-old and a
six-year-old and a seven-year-old. So um
so I actually you know as much as I live
my life I try to work really hard and
then come home turn off the phone be
very present with the kids and then they
go to sleep and then I get to work some
more and then me and my wife has a very
like which is I think maybe most
families with kids our age but you have
a very strict you always thought that
that was going to happen. You're going
to stay spontaneous and all that you end
up having an extremely strict calendar
where it's like Wednesday is dinner
night me and Nina have dinner together
Tuesday we're working like nights and so
forth. There's extremely strict
calendars to make that work.
Quick one. As you probably know by now,
I'm trying to make my life a little bit
more sustainable. And I consider myself
to be on a bit of a sustainability
journey in the same way that I'm on a
health journey. And it's a privilege to
be able to share that with all of you.
And you you all know if you've listened
to the last podcast that I traded in my
Range Rover Sport in for an electric
bicycle, which is now my only vehicle.
And next year hopefully I'll have my
electric car too if Tesla hurry up with
a Cybert truck. And that's where my
energy comes into my life and my sort of
sustainability journey. It makes your
life, if you are on that sustainability
journey, 10 times easier. This is one of
their, if you can't see this, I'm
holding it in my hand. If you're
listening on Spotify or Apple, this is
one of their renewable energy products.
If you're watching on YouTube, you
you'll you'll see this. This is called
the Harvey. It's this very clever little
device that allows the Zappy and the
Eddie, which I've talked about before on
this podcast, to be installed into your
home without hard wiring or without
batteries or without those um god-awful
transformers that a lot of people have
in their house. It's basically a tiny
device that's going to save you both
time and money. And for someone like me
who doesn't have loads of time on our
hands, it's a real lifesaver. If you're
looking to make a conscious switch and
you need a quick fix that's going to
save you a load of time, then head over
to myenergy.com to see this product and
many many more. You you're grew up from
a very humble beginnings with an
immigrant family as you've said and
because of the success of Clana that's
now made you very wealthy and it's
something wealth beyond probably you
ever imagined. I don't know don't know
how ambitious you were but um what role
does that that play now in your life in
terms of your relationship with money?
It was the thing that as you say you
thought might have been liberation from
a lot of pain and heartache and what
role does does the financial um side of
it success can play play your [snorts]
life? I think it's an interesting topic
and and you know I've been asked
sometimes like the classic question like
does money make you happy right and and
you know I I I understand why some
people try to say no it doesn't because
to some degree like you're the same
person even if you have a different
income level and wealth than you used to
have. So you're the same person. You
still get angry at things and sad at
things. You know, still things happens.
You you lose a relative or something
happens in your life, you know, you go
up and down. So from from one
perspective, I can understand why people
But I've stopped saying that because I
actually think that it's slightly out of
touch. I mean, there are elements in my
life I don't have to worry about. Like I
mean I can still remember the feeling of
like you know I used to go into 7-Eleven
and I would be like I would just love to
have orange juice but I can't afford it
or I would just love to have a Snickers
or I would just like like and I remember
the day coming in into 7-Eleven like it
doesn't matter. I can buy whatever I
like in the store. It will have no
impact and that is a difference and I I
just you know I think it's a little bit
like out of touch to say that that
doesn't impact you. I don't have to
worry. I never worry about finances.
Like it's all taken care of, right? And
that obviously creates a different life.
It gives you a different then I'm not a
big like I'm I I don't like have 10 cars
or anything like that. I'm not a big
interested in cars. I don't like I'm not
necessarily the person I I have a couple
of things like I have for example my I'm
very very proud that I bought a Steinway
piano that is selfplaying.
Oh, perfect.
Yes. So you actually have
[clears throat] this like app like
Spotify and you can go in and select.
Perfect. And you can sit there do the
video.
Yeah, exactly. Pretend that I have
[laughter] learned to play piano as
well. So like I have some like luxuries
that I've really afforded myself that I
think we have in a beautiful house and
and and things like that. But
but you know, but I still think that
like the key thing is I don't worry
about it and I know that most people and
I remember myself worrying about it,
right? Worrying about next month, end of
you know, end of these things and and
that is a difference in life obviously,
right? So that has changed. I read
something which was um was quite
[clears throat] difficult to read
actually which was about your father
and his response to your success.
Yeah.
Not being not being particularly proud
necessarily of your success.
Yeah. But that also comes back to
alcoholics like because so what ended up
happening in my u my life right is that
u my grandpa unfortunately drank himself
to death and then when I was growing up
my father was very conservative and I
never saw alcohol in our house. he
barely had a bad glass of wine and
unfortunately that started changing in
my like teens. So I started discovering
bottles of vodka at home and so forth.
And then over time uh there were
instances where I would come home and
dad would be quite drunk and and act in
a very irrational way and he became more
aggressive and and so forth. And and and
this was at a point of time where I was
still out partying and drinking and so
forth. And it was interesting because at
that point of time as and that just
tells you about you know the problems of
alcohol uh um addiction I never
reflected that maybe I have a problem as
well right that was like out of
course not like there was my father who
had an issue right and but he
unfortunately found himself in a spiral
in his life where and I think it's
almost like people find themselves in a
positive spiral negative spiral the
posit also spiral is like you know what
I can actually affect my own life and
now I'm going to try it a little bit oo
things got better you know what I can
maybe do even more I can do even more
and then some people are on that
positive part what other people find
themselves in a negative spir like I
have found myself in this it's not my
fault it's everything else's fault and
then you know things get even worse and
then look and they just found himself in
a very negative spiral and obviously I'm
simplifying people are different in all
these situations but there's something
in that and and dad found himself in
that spiral where it was everyone
everyone else and alcohol tends to
extrapolate that and make it even
stronger that you you basically blame
everything else and you take not don't
take the responsibility that's the
beginning of the 12 steps of the
anonymous alcoholis is actually to take
responsibility for your own actions and
so unfortunately and it it it went as
far as as um you know he he lost his job
he he lost his apartment and uh and I
found myself in a very tricky situation
because at simple my economical
situation was improving heavily and I
was trying to figure out what what do I
do now because
he could call me and he would ask for
money and I would be like well of course
I want to help my father and so I would
help him and then if I did that I didn't
hear from him for a couple of days and
then he would call me super drunk or
text me something very you know nasty
and so it was very difficult because and
then I started seeing counselors and
understanding that like maybe actually
in this situation I needed to put like
limits
you know, and and ask him to not um uh
to to say, "Look, I'm not going to do
this unless, you know, you do this and
stuff like that," which was kind of the
right way to deal with it. But very very
obviously tricky. And unfortunately,
in my situation, it didn't uh didn't
work. So, at the end, there was a
situation where, you know, um he was um
uh he was about to lose his apartment
and he'd had a discussion with me and I
was very like ambiguous. Should I help
him, should I help him or not? And um
and then I was it was an evening in in
the office and suddenly I see my phone's
phone number. He's calling me on the
phone and I was like I don't know yet
what the right answer is. Should I help
him or not? What should I do? It's
difficult. So I was like I'm going to
call him later. So I didn't answer the
phone. I went home. I had dinner with my
wife and we talked about it and then I
was like no this time around I should
probably help him. Uh I decided and I
tried to call him and he didn't answer
and I emailed he didn't answer. And I
was like, "Okay, fine. Maybe you just,
you know, whatever." And then in the
morning, my mother called and said he
was dead, right? So it was a so that was
like a very very obviously dramatic
moment in my life and very difficult
like uh you know from that perspective.
So um he he was so smart. He was so
thoughtful. He had gone to the places
where he had worked. He had tried to do
things better and so forth. He had been
in normal places where if you know I
remember him working for the
municipality for example and he integ
like he created some Excel systems that
would rationalize everybody's work and
nobody wanted to rationalize their work
because that meant that they would have
less to do and then maybe somebody would
lost their jobs. So he's doing all these
things and nobody was showing gratitude
to his attempts of trying to fix things
and things similarities to what I'm
doing. I could see him having those
things, but because of his background,
because of his situation, and to some
degree probably because of his ab, you
know, addiction, he just found himself
in this negative spiral rather than the
positive spiral that I found myself in.
And it just made him, you know, more
more depressed and and and and that made
him also very difficult for him to
relate to me because like in one way I
must believe and hope that at some point
of time he was proud and and and you
know, happy about how things have
evolved in my life. But at the same
point of time, it was very clear that he
felt frustrated by the fact that what he
had gotten and how his life had turned
out compared to mine. As as as crazy it
might seem that your father would relate
in those terms, but I think
unfortunately that was part of the case.
So, you know, it's very tricky and
difficult. Um and uh but I'm very happy
at least that I stopped drinking and I'm
I'm a I'm a sober alcoholic since nine
years now. So,
Oh, amazing. Yeah.
Well done. My last question then. Um
that was incredibly, you know,
incredibly moving for so many reasons.
And I think it's um it's really also
inspiring that you have that sense of
sort of empathy to be able to look back
at on your father and understand that a
lot of his um circumstances came from
his own pain
and that was a generational cycle.
Yes.
One that you you have the power to
to to stop. Yes. Per say. And um and
also to kind of it sounds like you've
kind of forgiven him for
Yeah, I have because look I think you
know people I don't think people still
fully understand alcohol uh alcoholism
in my opinion. It is a disease. He was
sick. He had an you know he had an
addiction. Yes. Was he does that mean
that he couldn't cure himself? No. He
could cure himself. If he would have
found himself on a positive spiral he
might have been able to cure himself.
That doesn't mean he wasn't sick. This
the father that I had last years was not
my true father. Those are not the
memories that I have from my youth when
he would bring me into the forest
outside Upsola and we would go on long
walks together and we would fantasize
about being space explorers or he would
introduce me to amazing science fiction
literature or what are these things like
there are different memories of my
father that was my true father that was
a sick man and and that's just
unfortunately like how things develop
right so
I know you're a father um three
beautiful kids um what matters to you in
terms of the the principles in which you
you hope to raise them. And obviously
now, as we talked about at the start of
this podcast, um much of the the I guess
the the circumstances that created you
were because you you were you went
without and you didn't have, you know,
things handed to you and you formed that
connection that if I'm going to be then
it's going to be a direct result of my
actions. So, what do you what's your
thinking as and what do you want to
impart on them? And
yeah, this it's it's a topic I tend to
talk a lot about with my wife and it's
very difficult. Um, I mean it it's a
mix, right? Because first and foremost,
like obviously my kids are not going to
have the same upbringing that I had.
Like there is a massive difference like
you know look at our vacations, look at
our summer house, look at like all the
things there like there's no way I'm
going to be able to ever like recreate
any of that. But um but that's you know
that's part of it. And I but I do think
also like when it comes to being spoiled
like to some degree to be entirely fair
like and I love my mother. She's
amazing. But she did spoil me. She had a
very hard time saying no. And if we were
in the grocery store and there was some
candy and I would be like I want candy.
She tended to give me the candy. So I'm
a pretty spoiled person by my
upbringing. Even though we didn't have
that much financial means. Now she
wouldn't buy the candy if there was no
money left. But if there was money left
she tended to buy it and then there was
no money left for something else. Right.
So like she had my my especially my mom
had very hard time putting nos to me and
she would say yes to basically
everything as long as she could
basically right um so you can spoil
somebody without having financial means
to some degree right um
now uh so that's one thing but but there
is something where you know and it was
funny because now it's like my son was
invited to like a you know a party a
birthday party with some of his friends
like six years old right and you're
standing and talking to the parents and
we have this amazing school is not a
private. It is a private school, but
it's not kind of though like upper class
private schools. It's actually a really
nice school with a good mix of people
from all types of society and stuff and
but very ambitious teachers and and a
good school and and we're starting and
the other parents are a little bit like
complaining about like, you know, oh
this could be better and this could be
better and I it's not like I didn't
agree with them that some things were um
couldn't be improved in our school as
well as there always can be. But then I
told him to I I I like stopped him a
little bit and said, "You know what? I
to be honest like for myself if I think
about the schools that I went to in the
environment I brought up into I
sometimes wonder whether I want my kids
to continue going to this very good
school or whether maybe when they're
like 12 or 13 I'm going to try to find
the worst school in Sweden and put them
in there for 3 years just to create a
little bit of resistance like to get
something like a different perspective
on like be in an environment where it's
very difficult and like I was like
because I really want them to get the
resistance. I want them to get to know
themselves and get to know that they can
actually fend for themselves, that they
can solve these problem for themselves.
I don't want them to be without
resistance. And I feel like all of our
parenting today is about like remove all
resistance and I'm like no no I want
some resistance. And the funny thing is
I'm telling this to the other um parents
and they're all looking at me like is he
stupid? [laughter]
Is he is he wacko? Like what's wrong
with him? Like you know I was like no no
no I want some resistance right? And I
remember that just to to round off.
Look, when we did that round the world
trip,
uh we had very little money on that trip
and at some point of time we arrived
from Singapore to to to uh Brisbane and
we were going down to Sydney and we were
actually supposed to take the cargo ship
the next day to go to uh US already. So
we were only going to stay one day in
Australia, but we missed the boat. We
had an unfortunate event and we came too
late and the cargo ship was not going to
wait for two passengers, I promise you.
So, they [clears throat] just left and
we went to the firm that helped us find
these cargoers ship trips and they said,
"Sorry, next boat is in a month." And
we're like, "Okay, but we don't have any
budget, no money, and now we're like
stuck in Australia for a month."
Obviously, quite a nice place to be
stuck, honestly. But but still like,
and I remember walking down the street,
I think it was Elizabeth Street or
something in in Sydney. And I remember
that like I have no job. I have no
money. I have nowhere to stay. I have
only my backpack. and you were like,
[snorts] "And we're going to stay here
for a month. Let's try to start a life."
And we had to find a place to live that
was affordable. And we had to find a
job. And we actually started working as
uh furniture movers for a company called
City Move. Everyone worked there called
it Chitty Move because they had this but
it was like and we were and so but the
point is that like it taught me I can
fend for myself. I'll survive and like
it's only dependent on me and it that
resistance created a sense of like you
know I can do this and so forth, right?
And So that's what I hope to give my
children somehow.
But how would you do that if you pass
them your wealth?
Well, that I'm not sure I'm going to
pass them the wealth. So I actually have
officially said in some interviews in
Sweden that I am and and my wife and me
are still not entirely aligned on this
topic, but I have actually said I'm not
going to give them anything. And I tell
them in that um and it was even funny
because you know in Sweden I'm quite
well known. So even the fact that I said
so on public TV then my kids heard from
their friends like dad [laughter] you
said on TV that you're not going to give
us anything. That's unfair. We want like
I know like stuff. No, but I've been
telling you consistently like when
you're 18 years old, you're on your own.
Like and then my wife always but we may
buy an apartment for them, right? And I
was LIKE I'M NOT SURE. [laughter] LET'S
SEE. Like I just there is to your point
like I mean I don't I I don't want to
like and and in Sweden also it's a
little bit provocative for somebody with
money to say I'm not going to give
anything because I I don't I'm not
saying I don't believe in welfare. I
think sometimes you need to support
people in in difficult situations and so
forth. So I said look I'm not talking
about people in general. I'm only
talking about my kids, but for my own
kids, I'm not convinced that giving them
all of this is going to make them
happier. And I meet a lot of people from
family wealth that have inherited wealth
that are extremely unhappy with the
pressure and the expectations that comes
with that. So, as much as again, I I'm
not saying that money doesn't make you
happy. We've already talked about it,
but like there are some aspects of it
that are very difficult. And I think
that like in general building a person's
own self-confidence and belief in their
own abilities to actually have a
positive impact on their lives. I still
still think that that is the key, you
know, uh path to happiness.
I agree. [laughter] Listen, Sebastian,
thank you so much for your time and your
honesty and your humility and um you're
a massive inspiration to me for so many
reasons, not least for your business
success, but I really do come back to
that point about you building such a
great tech company without technical
expertise. I hear it all day every day
from entrepreneurs. I felt it myself. I
think I've told myself that there's
certain industries I can't build in
because of that because I lack
fundamental expertise there. Um, and I
think you you kind of buck that trend
and prove to me and entrepreneurs
listening that you can. Um, if you have
the drive and determination and that
underlying self-belief to get there.
What you've done is just absolutely
phenomenal.
Unbelievably pleasant human being as
well. And um, you're very sort of very
very honest and I think that's um,
that's a gift that that I'm glad you
shared with us. Thank you.
Um, but yeah, thank you so much for your
time and uh I can't wait to continue to
watch your journey. It's been a
pleasure.
Exciting.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. [music]
[music]
[singing]